<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Scam: Inside Southeast Asia’s Cybercrime Compounds</title>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
<link href="stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:bbb0d83e-b2b6-4881-9f3b-4f673f963ae3" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div id="FM01">
<p class="fm-para1"><span id="page_i"/>‘Enslaved and extremely online, the captives at the heart of this book express the grim paradoxes and intolerable realities of our present more than anything I’ve read about in years’</p>
<p class="fm-para2">Quinn Slobodian, author of<br/><i>Crack-Up Capitalism</i></p>
<p class="fm-para1">‘In recent years the industrialised perpetration of scams from the Far East has gradually become exposed by the media. Very little is known about the origins and workings of this “industry”. <i>Scam</i> is the first authoritative and deep investigation by the world’s leading scholars on this subject. It is a meticulously researched, fascinating, and detailed account of these Asian crime groups that is both gripping and harrowing. It is essential reading for anyone interested in frauds, scams, and modern slavery’</p>
<p class="fm-para2">Mark Button, co-author of<br/><i>Cyber Frauds, Scams and Their Victims</i></p>
<p class="fm-para1">‘<i>Scam</i> is the definitive account of one of the most pernicious problems of our time, and a landmark study of the evolution of modern crime’</p>
<p class="fm-para2">Zeke Faux, author of <i>Number Go Up</i></p>
<p class="fm-para1">‘<i>Scam</i> is a carefully researched, terrifying expose of the secret industry causing untold misery all over the world. One of the most shocking books I’ve read in years’</p>
<p class="fm-para2">Grace Blakeley, author of <i>Vulture Capitalism</i></p>
<p class="fm-para1">‘Meticulously researched and drawing on rich empirical data, <i>Scam</i> is a comprehensive examination of an illicit trade shrouded in secrecy. Through their great storytelling and probing analysis, Franceschini, Li, and Bo offer readers a close look at the inner workings of the scam compounds in Cambodia, the Philippines, Myanmar, and Laos. This captivating book will be the definitive work on the online scam industry in Southeast Asia for many years’</p>
<p class="fm-para2">Ko-lin Chin, co-author of <i>The Chinese Heroin Trade</i><br/>and author of <i>The Golden Triangle</i></p>
<p class="fm-para1">‘Riveting and revealing, <i>Scam</i> brilliantly traces this perverted form of surveillance capitalism from its epicentre in Southeast Asia to global China’s underbelly – the underworld of Chinese-led criminal syndicates, their collusion with non-Chinese political elites, and the slave labour regime that is shockingly both postmodern and primordial. An informative and layered analysis that should be read widely’</p>
<p class="fm-para2">Ching Kwan Lee, author of<br/><i>The Specter of Global China</i></p>
<p class="fm-para1"><span id="page_ii"/>‘Few are better placed to explore the sinister world of cyber scam operations than Ivan Franceschini, Ling Li, and Mark Bo. Brimming with first-hand accounts and painstakingly sought testimonials from survivors of these brutal compounds, their book stands testament to the chaos these operations have wreaked across Southeast Asia and beyond. The authors make the stakes clear, contextualising it within the rise of Global China and the rise of transnational criminal enterprises that have burgeoned alongside it, but never forgetting the voices of those enslaved inside these compounds. From forced labour to trafficking to the millions around the world who have lost their life savings, the issue of scams is one of the most pressing of our time. This book is the definitive story of how we got here, of who has profited and who has suffered, and goes beyond easy tropes and narratives. A clear, incisive, and must-read account’</p>
<p class="fm-para2">Shibani Mahtani, co-author of <i>Among the Braves</i></p>
<p class="fm-para1"><b>Ivan Franceschini</b> is a lecturer at the Asia Institute, University of Melbourne. His expertise lies in the field of labour rights, with a specific focus on China and Southeast Asia. He co-founded the <i>Made in China Journal</i>, <i>The People’s Map of Global China</i>, and <i>Global China Pulse</i>. His latest books include <i>Xinjiang Year Zero</i>, <i>Proletarian China</i>, and <i>Global China as Method</i>.</p>
<p class="fm-para1"><b>Ling Li</b> is a project manager at Humanity Research Consultancy. She provides support to survivors of scam compounds in Southeast Asia, helping them to secure humanitarian aid and repatriation. She is currently pursuing a PhD at Ca’ Foscari University of Venice.</p>
<p class="fm-para1"><b>Mark Bo</b> is a civil society practitioner who has been based in East and Southeast Asia since 2006. He uses his background in corporate and financial mapping to investigate stakeholders involved in Asia’s online gambling, fraud, and money-laundering industries.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>