<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Scam: Inside Southeast Asia’s Cybercrime Compounds</title>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
<link href="stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:bbb0d83e-b2b6-4881-9f3b-4f673f963ae3" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div id="Chapter02">
<h1 class="chapter"><span id="page_74"/><span id="page_75"/><span class="ch-num">2</span> <span class="ch-title"><span class="bd">Getting In</span></span></h1>
<p class="noindent1">Before ending up in a scam compound in Myanmar, Zhang had a stable job at the Lushan Botanical Garden in Jiangxi province, China.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn1" id="ch02_ft1">1</a></sup> During the COVID-19 pandemic, he lost his position and found himself in severe financial stress due to family illness and debt. With a PhD from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, he chose to pursue new opportunities overseas, where salaries were higher, and eventually got recruited by a company in Singapore.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn2" id="ch02_ft2">2</a></sup> Everything appeared promising, until repeated visa delays prompted his agent to suggest that he work temporarily at the company’s office in Thailand. Aware of the reports about people getting tricked into the scam industry in Southeast Asia, Zhang was initially hesitant, but after thoroughly checking the company’s documents and confident in the legitimacy of the onboarding process, he chose to trust the agent. However, soon after he arrived in Thailand, his phone, ID card, and passport were confiscated, and he was taken to a scam compound in Myawaddy Township, just over the border in Myanmar’s Kayin State. There, he was forced to perpetrate pig-butchering scams, posing <span id="page_76"/>as women to convince targets in Europe and North America to invest in cryptocurrencies.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn3" id="ch02_ft3">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="para">Once inside, Zhang heard stories of people who had successfully managed to escape and began contemplating doing the same. Yet he soon realised that regaining his freedom would be exceedingly difficult. Not only did the walls stand four to five metres high, with high-voltage electricity cables on top and armed sentries monitoring the perimeter, but there were also checkpoints every few hundred metres outside, with more armed guards surveilling the compound’s surrounding areas. Any attempt to flee was met with a threat of lethal force from the guards stationed inside or outside. Being unfamiliar with Myanmar and lacking financial resources to bribe people to guarantee his safety, Zhang ultimately abandoned the notion of escaping.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn4" id="ch02_ft4">4</a></sup> Instead, he contacted media in China, which, intrigued by the fact that he had a PhD, quickly picked up the story. The persistent media coverage put significant pressure on the group holding him, which agreed to reduce the ransom they were demanding from CN¥120,000 to CN¥59,000. Eventually, Zhang’s family paid the ransom and he managed to get out.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn5" id="ch02_ft5">5</a></sup></p>
<p class="para">Since Zhang had a PhD from an elite institution, his story made headlines in China, triggering indignation among the Chinese public. Still, not all people who survive Southeast Asia’s scam compounds receive the same level of attention and sympathy. In late 2023, at roughly the time when Zhang’s ordeal was going viral on Chinese social media, Yun and Pei, two youths from China’s Sichuan province, were scrolling Kuaishou, a popular Chinese live-video platform, when they noticed what looked like a promising opportunity. Aged seventeen and twenty, they had been scraping a living on construction sites around their hometown, and here was a job that promised to pay nearly double their daily wage, plus food and lodging. After receiving a first positive response, they embarked on a journey to a coastal city in Guangxi province for an interview in <span id="page_77"/>person. There, their enthusiasm quickly turned to fear, as their prospective employer threatened them with violence if they did not board a boat. Soon, they were in Vietnam, where they spent a couple of days under guard in a hotel before being transported by car to Bavet, a Cambodian border town.</p>
<p class="para">In Bavet, they discovered the job they had been recruited to do. Yun and Pei were taken to a compound hosting both online gambling and cyberfraud operations. They were told they would have to engage in online scams. Unwilling, they tried to escape but were caught by security guards and beaten badly. After being locked up in a dormitory for several days, they finally agreed to learn the scam techniques. In a stroke of luck, they were soon moved to another compound and managed to contact relatives back in China through WeChat. Their families promptly reported their situation to the authorities in China and the Chinese Embassy in Cambodia. Finally, in January 2024, they were rescued by Cambodian police.</p>
<p class="para">A continent away, another invisible story was unfolding. George, a young Ugandan man in his early thirties, had taken advantage of the rare opportunity to spend four years in India working towards an IT-related degree.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn6" id="ch02_ft6">6</a></sup> After graduating, he returned to Kampala, where he worked as a freelancer, fixing systems, configuring routers, installing cables, and the like. Then COVID-19 hit, and everything slowed down. With his livelihood at stake, in November 2020 he decided to move to Dubai. Once there, he found that life was hard: ‘I was just doing anything … freelancing still, I can say. Like doing minor jobs, small jobs, odd jobs, simple jobs … you get paid cash, do a job and get paid instantly. Because I had a visa that I had to renew every three months, and also had accommodation to pay for. So that means I had to keep moving, like, as I look for a job, I had to keep working also … to sustain myself there.’</p>
<p class="para">For this reason, when in August 2022 a friend mentioned a well-paid IT job opportunity in Laos, he jumped at it. ‘Some company was looking for guys to manage their data and it was just a simple six-months contract,’ he recounts. His friend introduced him to a woman from the company, who offered him a basic monthly salary of US$1,500, plus allowances and commissions. Accommodation would be provided, and expenses covered. She introduced the company, and everything seemed to check out. Once George agreed, the woman took care of his visa and bought his flight and <span id="page_78"/>insurance. Soon, he was on his way to the Golden Triangle, on Laos’s border with Myanmar and Thailand.</p>
<p class="para">There, he was asked to sign a contract that was completely different from the one discussed in Dubai, and which put him in substantial debt to the company. His passport and phone were taken away and he was introduced to his new job: using pre-written scripts to contact people from all over the world and scam them into putting money into fake investments. For two months he dragged his feet, insisting that he was simply an IT guy and that he should be asked to do the work he was good at, until one day he was sold to a second scam company in Myanmar. The people who traded him did not even tell him how much they gained from the transaction: ‘They don’t tell you [how much they sell you for]. They just tell you: “We own you. We bought you.” … It’s weird. It takes you back to the, the ages of the slave trade in Africa … it was hard to believe when someone tells you: “I own you.” ’ He was supposed to be gone for only six months – but it would take him a whole year to find his way back to Kampala.</p>
<p class="para">Just like Zhang, Yun, Pei, and George, every year thousands of people are tricked, trafficked, and sold to scam operators throughout Southeast Asia and beyond. As we have seen in the Introduction, the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights estimated that in 2023 at least 120,000 people were being held in situations where they were forced to carry out online scams across Myanmar, with another 100,000 in Cambodia.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn7" id="ch02_ft7">7</a></sup> Such numbers remain vigorously contested by local state officials and are very hard to confirm. On the one hand, many areas where scam compounds are located are inaccessible, with the sites closed to the public and heavily secured, so it is very difficult to gather reliable data. On the other, the backgrounds and motivations of those working inside vary. While many have been duped and trafficked, others enter the industry in full knowledge that they are going to engage in illegal work and approach their tasks as a job just like any other. Others again know (or think they know) what they are getting into, but when they see the actual conditions and attempt to leave they find they are trapped, their documents withheld and their debt to the company mounting as absurd fees imposed by the managers accrue.</p>
<p class="para"><span id="page_79"/>Establishing how people end up in the scam compounds is always tricky. Knowing that it could undermine people’s motivation to help them, and that they may face criminal charges in both their home country and the location of the scam operation, some survivors are disincentivised to admit they have entered the industry willingly. Further complicating things, there are cases where abuses have been exaggerated in order to elicit public sympathy, creating inconsistencies in survivors’ stories that, when exposed, ultimately undermine efforts to support them. This occurred in the case of Sihanoukville’s so-called blood slave mentioned in the previous chapter, where a semi-fictitious story recounted by a survivor backfired spectacularly, providing the Cambodian authorities with new ammunition to deny the existence of scam compounds in the country and even arrest key individuals involved in rescue operations.</p>
<p class="para">It is exactly this ambiguity and the resulting distrust towards the testimonies of survivors that in mid-2022 led a civil society organisation to declare that it would stop rescuing individuals who had entered the compounds after a certain date. According to this reasoning, due to the significant media coverage that the online scam industry was receiving at that point, it was impossible for people who ended up in the compounds after that date not to know what they were getting into. More widely, there have been morally charged debates about what to make of those who, willingly or under duress (or any degree in between), make scam operations possible. Should those who knew (or should have known) the work was likely to be illegal and still entered the industry, only to find themselves trapped, be considered victims at all? Oftentimes, these discussions have served as little more than a distraction from the structural reasons that make so many people vulnerable to the lure of the industry, including the widespread immiseration brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic.</p>
<p class="para">In this chapter we attempt to complicate the picture of how people end up trapped in Southeast Asia’s scam compounds by describing several ways in which this can happen. In so doing, we hope to show how many survivors find themselves in their predicament due to a combination of desperation, bad luck, and naïvety. More specifically, we focus on seven aspects: deceptive job ads; the role of professional brokers on the scam operators’ payroll; recruitment by friends or relatives; the lure of social media influencers; trafficking by organised crime groups; kidnappings; and sales between compounds.</p>
<h2 class="h1"><span id="page_80"/>Job Ads</h2>
<p class="noindent1">Job adverts are a very common recruitment method used by scam operators. Circulated through various job-recruitment websites and social media, these announcements often do not specify the type of work but in many cases carry similar hallmarks. In a typical example, one message posted in 2020 in Chinese on a public Facebook group for jobseekers in Cambodia reads: ‘Are you looking for work? I have a job for a man or woman between 18 and 30, 6,000 yuan with possible salary raise depending on your performance. Accommodation provided. Basic requirements: knowing how to type and communicate in Chinese. Location: O’smach. Please DM me if interested.’<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn8" id="ch02_ft8">8</a></sup> Instant-messaging apps including Telegram, Line, WeChat, and QQ are also common recruitment grounds. Telegram is particularly popular among recruiters for scam companies, with a single ad sometimes including dozens of vacancies, promising high salaries, commissions, year-end bonuses, and promotion opportunities. Based on our observation, on a single day, more than one hundred job ads can be posted by different actors in a single Telegram group chat.</p>
<p class="para">According to the Hong Kong–based NGO Branches of Hope, several red flags make these dubious job offers stand out.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn9" id="ch02_ft9">9</a></sup> First, the job is generally described in vague terms, with calls for ‘app developers’, ‘engineers’, ‘HR managers’, ‘crypto investors’, or ‘translators’, but without any detailed description of the tasks involved. Second, the prospective employer promises to cover food, accommodation, and travel expenses. Third, there are language requirements (often Chinese and English, but also other languages depending on the market being targeted), and a mismatch between the salaries offered and the level of skills required, which usually do not go beyond basic computer literacy, with no previous experience needed. Fourth, the ads target younger individuals, aged between eighteen and thirty-five, of various nationalities. Fifth, the positions are often in places known for their association with online gambling and scamming – although this is also sometimes circumvented by pretending that the position is in a ‘safe’ place in the region, such as Thailand. Finally, there may be compensation fees for early termination <span id="page_81"/>of the employment or, conversely, a notable emphasis on the fact that no such fees will be levied.</p>
<p class="para">Although they often carry these tell-tale signs, many of these ads appear on legitimate websites alongside regular positions, leading many jobseekers to trust them. When deceptive recruitment is in play, the whole process is often engineered to reassure the target that the job is genuine. At least three of our interviewees told us that they were already aware of the existence of scam operations when they fell for phoney job offers. These informants came from different places – Malaysia, mainland China, and Taiwan – but their stories are remarkably similar. They all lost their jobs during the pandemic and started looking for work on legitimate mainstream platforms. On the surface, the recruitment process was standard and professional, with background checks and one or two rounds of video interviews, followed by formal offer letters. Feeling confident that their level of education and work experience would make them unlikely targets for scam operators, they boarded the flights to Thailand and Cambodia that the recruiters had bought for them, only to find themselves trapped in scam compounds in Sihanoukville and Myanmar.</p>
<p class="para">Some ads involve sectors that have nothing to do with IT, such as construction, food, and tourism. For instance, Yun and Pei, the two Chinese youths we encountered at the beginning of this chapter, were lured through an advertisement for construction work within China. Others target specific skilled professionals, such as engineers, chefs, dancers, make-up artists, and photographers. In some cases, recruiters proactively reach out to people who have posted their profiles online. Sometimes they offer to cover travel expenses for freelancers to meet the management, which is not unusual in some industries. For instance, in early 2023 a digital media outlet in mainland China received distress messages from over fifty individuals trapped in a scam compound in Myanmar.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn10" id="ch02_ft10">10</a></sup> These people identified themselves as engineers and shared a common narrative: they had all come across an enticing job offer for a ‘Thai/Singapore project’ in a WeChat job-hunting group that offered: ‘Work five days and get two days off, eight hours a day, and a monthly salary of CN¥19,000 after taxes.’</p>
<p class="para"><span id="page_82"/>The ruse was well crafted, and did not arouse the suspicions of the applicants. The offered amount was in line with what a Chinese engineer working overseas could expect, and some of them had been introduced to the opportunity by friends. Moreover, the recruiter provided photos of the dormitories, canteen facilities, and the machinery that would be used in the supposed factory. Encouraged by the seemingly legitimate opportunity, over a hundred people applied, and seventy-eight were offered the job. Organised into five groups, they boarded flights from China to Thailand under the belief that the factory, which supposedly dealt with fishmeal production, was located in Mae Sot, near the Thai border with Myanmar. Only after being smuggled into Myanmar did they realise that they had been deceived and sold into one of the most notorious scam compounds in the region.</p>
<p class="para">A common strategy particularly widespread in mainland China and Taiwan is to hire people ostensibly for <i>daigou</i> (<span class="font1">代</span><span class="font1">购</span>) work – that is, the practice of dispatching professional shoppers abroad to buy commodities on behalf of individuals in their home country. As disposable incomes and desire for foreign and luxury products grew among the Chinese population, <i>daigou</i> became a major industry, with buyers sending or bringing products into the country that are otherwise difficult to find or subject to high taxes. The practice is also prevalent in Taiwan, as there is demand for products, especially from Southeast Asia, that are not widely available there. In one example, in mid-December 2022 the Taiwanese police raided two buildings, one in New Taipei and the other in Taoyuan, that were suspected of hosting online scam activities.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn11" id="ch02_ft11">11</a></sup> They discovered fifty-eight people who had been lured by the scam group, imprisoned, and forced to engage in criminal activities.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn12" id="ch02_ft12">12</a></sup> Three corpses – two male and one female – were also found inside, bearing the marks of the physical violence they received while still alive. The Taiwanese police later found out that this group not only held people in Taiwan, but also sold people to scam compounds in Myanmar under the pretence of sending them there for <i>daigou</i>.</p>
<p class="para"><span id="page_83"/>A female live broadcaster who displayed a very luxurious lifestyle on social media was identified by the Taiwanese media as a key player in this operation.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn13" id="ch02_ft13">13</a></sup> According to their investigation, the woman did not work alone but oversaw a network of other live broadcasters who helped her to peddle luxury goods on the internet. She also had three ‘district representatives’ working for her, with several collaborators below them using various ploys to trick people into scam compounds.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn14" id="ch02_ft14">14</a></sup> One of her alleged victims, a young woman surnamed Lin, recounted her ordeal to journalists. In early July 2022, the influencer had published a Facebook post saying that she was looking for people to help with her <i>daigou</i> business by buying Buddhist amulets in Thailand. Sensing a good opportunity to travel overseas and earn some easy money, Lin contacted her and together they made arrangements for the trip. When she arrived in Bangkok, Lin was picked up by a friend of the influencer and transported to a scam compound in Myanmar.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn15" id="ch02_ft15">15</a></sup> There she discovered that what awaited her was not a three-day shopping spree, but rather four gruesome months of forced sex work and online scamming. In late November, she finally managed to contact her family in Taiwan. Only after her relatives paid almost US$10,000 to the scam company was she finally released and able to return to Taiwan.</p>
<p class="para">As public awareness about the industry has grown, some online scam operations have started to come up with creative ways to repackage their hiring practices. One common strategy has been to acknowledge the existence of problems in the online industries, while claiming to be different. Two companies located within a compound in Bavet, Cambodia, provide us with good examples.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn16" id="ch02_ft16">16</a></sup> In the first case, the website of one ‘online gaming’ company had several pages warning jobseekers about the risks of being tricked by fake roles in Southeast Asia and falling victim to human <span id="page_84"/>trafficking, encouraging people to seek work through reputable employers, such as itself.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn17" id="ch02_ft17">17</a></sup> In the second case, the company – which was mentioned on several online message boards as a scam operator – presented itself as a responsible player in a sea of unscrupulous actors, warning jobseekers to look out for recruitment scams.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn18" id="ch02_ft18">18</a></sup></p>
<p class="para">This second case makes a particularly riveting read. On one of its websites, the company published the story of a woman who claimed to have travelled to Cambodia for work only to realise that she had been hired by a ‘black company’ that would not let her leave the building, did not pay as promised, and demanded a fee when she asked to quit.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn19" id="ch02_ft19">19</a></sup> Upon hearing about the good working conditions at the ‘virtuous’ company – the one publishing this story – she approached them for an interview. This led to her being offered the job and her new employer even ‘compensating’ the previous one. Still, had she checked the website of her new employer, this (probably fictitious) woman might have been slightly suspicious. An FAQ page stated that if employees quit, they would have to pay official expenses and possible ‘compensation costs from other companies’, unless they stayed for at least six months.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn20" id="ch02_ft20">20</a></sup> In the same page, responding to the question ‘If I can’t perform, will I be sold to another company?’, the company said it prohibited human trafficking, and unhappy staff needed only write a resignation letter to be allowed to leave.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn21" id="ch02_ft21">21</a></sup> On another webpage, the company denied being engaged in online scams, and in yet another it stated that it allowed employees to move freely, never sold employees, and did not take away their passports.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn22" id="ch02_ft22">22</a></sup> As the old Latin saying goes: ‘Excusatio non petita, accusatio manifesta’ (unsolicited excuse, manifested accusation).</p>
<h2 class="h1"><span id="page_85"/>Professional Brokers</h2>
<p class="noindent1">Another channel through which people end up in the scam compounds is through professional brokers, whose costs are borne by the scam company and accrue to the debt that these individuals and their families may later be required to pay to secure their release. These brokers – some of which are legally registered agencies – are contracted by scam companies specifically to lure people in.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn23" id="ch02_ft23">23</a></sup> Many of them work remotely and flexibly in countries where scam operators seek workers to staff their activities, a condition that presents some advantages but also makes them more likely to get caught by the police in the country where they work.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn24" id="ch02_ft24">24</a></sup> In December 2023, for example, a Vietnamese woman who had worked as an interpreter for online companies in Cambodia was sentenced to sixteen years in jail by a Vietnamese court for trafficking nine people to Cambodia after promising them customer service work.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn25" id="ch02_ft25">25</a></sup> She had received US$2,900 in brokerage fees at a rate of US$300–500 per person. At least one of those she duped was described by Vietnamese media as ‘a friend’, who then shared the opportunity with four of her relatives. After seven of these people escaped, they reported the broker to the police in Vietnam, which led to her arrest. The court heard that she had been travelling to and from Cambodia since 2019, during which time it can be assumed she had trafficked more people.</p>
<p class="para">In some cases, brokers themselves are trapped inside the scam compounds and engage in these activities to make money or simply to survive (sometimes both), further blurring the line between victim and perpetrator. A Rest of World report from 2022 recounts the story of a Vietnamese woman who was trafficked to Cambodia, where she was resold several times, an experience she described as ‘hell’.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn26" id="ch02_ft26">26</a></sup> Eventually, she managed to <span id="page_86"/>climb the ranks to become a recruiter herself – an uncomfortable transition that points to the dehumanising capacity of the industry, even though this specific person apparently ‘made peace with her role in hiring people into a business that deceived and traumatized her’. Another Vietnamese man trafficked to a compound in Cambodia tricked three of his friends into joining a scam operation after being offered US$100 for every person he recruited: ‘In order to have money and not be starved and be beaten, I tricked three of my friends into coming here … But I did not receive any money.’ He returned to Vietnam after his family paid a ransom, but was arrested for his role in trafficking others.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn27" id="ch02_ft27">27</a></sup> In another case reported in Malaysian media, a woman who had been trafficked to Myanmar was told she could not leave unless she found someone to replace her.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn28" id="ch02_ft28">28</a></sup> Similarly, three of our interviewees in Myanmar were given the choice of paying a ransom or recruiting at least five people in order to be released.</p>
<p class="para">Professional brokers may spend months building personal connections with their targets. These people can pose as a fellow townsman (<span class="font1">老</span><span class="font1">乡</span> <i>laoxiang</i>), an attentive match on a dating app, or even a team partner in online video games. After building up trust, they bide their time before bringing up an unmissable job opportunity abroad. For instance, one of our interviewees from China teamed up with a stranger named Feifei on the online video game <i>Dota.</i> As they got to know each other, he learned that his new teammate was also from his hometown. After several weeks of playing and chatting together through the game, they became close friends and Feifei even bought some in-game virtual equipment for him. When they added each other on WeChat, our interviewee saw that Feifei often shared photos of fancy dinners and luxury cars, so he surmised that the man was from a rich family. Little did he know that this ‘pretending-to-be-rich package’ is a trick commonly used by recruiters, who share photos of luxury bags, sports cars, and fancy lifestyles on social media to attract the attention of their targets.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn29" id="ch02_ft29">29</a></sup> Convinced by months of interactions and consistent displays of wealth, when Feifei presented him with a job opportunity in Cambodia, our informant accepted without hesitation – only to find himself trapped in a scam compound.</p>
<p class="para"><span id="page_87"/>A similar strategy was employed on Xiao Zheng, a Chinese man who got trapped in a scam company in Phnom Penh in 2021:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1">
<p class="noindent1">I know the person who sold me through online gaming, he plays very well, so we teamed up together. One day, he asked me if I was from Anhui province because my accent sounded familiar. Then he said he was from Lu’an city, and at that time I thought, wow, he’s a fellow townsman. What a coincidence! I never expected to be deceived by him. Later, while playing games, he casually mentioned that he worked in Cambodia, saying his job was so easy that he had become lazy and unmotivated. I was jealous because I had just graduated and was working so hard for a little over 3,000 yuan [roughly US$420] in China. Hearing what he said, I was curious, and he briefly described his work situation. He said he worked in procurement for a company, a job with no technical skills and very little to do. Then he started encouraging me to also work in Cambodia. At first, I was hesitant, but he constantly shared photos of his fancy life and salary slips. Then I decided to go to join him in his company.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="para">In cases where deception is used to ensnare people, the relationships that develop are sometimes so intimate that they leave deep emotional scars. When one of our interviewees was telling us his story of being tricked by someone from his hometown, the pain and disappointment on his face were obvious: ‘I really saw him as a true friend. Really. Because he once helped me a lot during my hardest time. Especially as he is also a person from my hometown, you know that kind of bond, right? I definitely trusted him more than others. So, when he asked me whether I wanted to go to work as a chef in Cambodia, I agreed and just went.’ Alice, the young Taiwanese woman whose story we recounted at the very beginning of the book, was also betrayed by a colleague she had met at her workplace in the Philippines:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1">
<p class="noindent1">To be honest, at that time I was being severely bullied by all my colleagues in the Philippines, except him. That was a new workplace for me, and I did not have any friends there. He was the only person who would greet me, ask how I was, and care about my feelings. So, when he said that he knew of a new work opportunity in Phnom Penh and suggested that I change work environment, I trusted him.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="para"><span id="page_88"/>To convince their targets to take the bait, recruiters offer company-sponsored flights and promise to handle visas, work permits, and associated fees. Most of our interviewees arrived in their destination country legally, and some indicated that the scam companies are well connected with the immigration authorities. In the Philippines, the authorities have been investigating connections between the traffickers and immigration and airport personnel, with reports implicating officers and staff in facilitating Filipinos leaving the country with dubious work papers, as well as allowing foreigners destined for online work to enter the Philippines without adequate paperwork.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn30" id="ch02_ft30">30</a></sup></p>
<h2 class="h1">Freelance Recruiters</h2>
<p class="noindent1">In the same Rest of World article mentioned above, one Vietnamese man told the reporters: ‘The reason people still go to scam companies is because they are scammed by friends and family.’<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn31" id="ch02_ft31">31</a></sup> While identifying this as the easiest way to recruit people, he took pride in the fact that he had never done that. These so-called friends and family are what we call freelance recruiters – opportunists who are not always part of the industry but often know people who are and exploit these connections to make some easy money by taking advantage of vulnerable acquaintances, friends, or even relatives. We had close experience of this when, in 2022, a relative of one of the authors was approached by her music tutor, a Chinese woman living in Cambodia, who asked if she was interested in translation work at a company operating in a notorious scam compound on the coast. When she expressed surprise at the offer and said she knew the reputation of that location, the tutor said not to believe everything the media reports, and that women are free to come and go from the compound.</p>
<p class="para">Stories of people tricked into the compounds by family members are not uncommon, especially in China. In early 2023, the Chinese media widely reported the story of Hao, a forty-year-old man whose gaming <span id="page_89"/>company went bust during the COVID pandemic.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn32" id="ch02_ft32">32</a></sup> Heavily indebted and at a loss about how to make a living, he heeded the advice of one of his uncles, who told him about an unmissable opportunity in a ‘call centre’ in Myanmar. Once he got there, he realised that it was a scam compound and that he was not allowed to leave. The uncle was also working for the compound, earning a fee ranging from CN¥10,000 to CN¥20,000 for every individual he recruited. Hao spent two months inside before managing to escape. Once he got out, he became famous as an anti-scam TikToker. In another case that occurred in April 2023, an underage girl was intercepted at Kunming airport en route to Cambodia, where she believed a well-paid job was waiting for her.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn33" id="ch02_ft33">33</a></sup> She had been talked into it by a distant relative she had not seen in a long time and expected to be paid US$1,500 per month, with food and accommodation covered, although she had no clue where she would work nor what she would do. The police called her parents, and she was eventually persuaded to return home.</p>
<p class="para">Many of these brokers exploit the bonds of trust and solidarity derived from sharing the same place of origin – ties that have always been a powerful driving force for Chinese international migration. In Phnom Penh, we encountered a nineteen-year-old man we will call Xiaozan. He had arrived in the Cambodian capital in 2019 to work on the construction site of a new shopping mall, but only a few months later found himself unemployed due to the COVID-19 outbreak. This is how he recounted his ordeal:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1">
<p class="noindent1">I come from a poor family, and my father, also a construction worker, taught me the skills. [In 2019] I travelled to Phnom Penh with some friends because there were many projects here. However, I lost my job due to the COVID-19 pandemic and couldn’t afford the US$4,000 flight ticket back home. During that time, I also met my [Cambodian] wife, so I wanted to do everything to stay. With no other skills besides construction work, I accepted a job offer from a fellow townsman I knew <span id="page_90"/>since I arrived in Cambodia to work as a maintenance worker in Sihanoukville. It seemed reasonable because I knew there were many casinos and online businesses in Sihanoukville that needed workers, and the salary they offered was comparable to my previous job. However, the moment I settled in, they confiscated my passport. I was powerless. I had no money, no connections, do not speak the local language to ask for help, and now don’t even have any identity [documents].</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="noindent1">In Sihanoukville he was severely beaten, and eventually sold to five different compounds. As he was not provided any medical care, only painkillers, this resulted in a permanent injury to his leg (when we met him in Phnom Penh in July 2022, he was still limping). Still, he felt he was lucky, because he was young and able to learn quickly in the initial weeks when he was trained on how to operate the scams. Others had it much worse: he knew of several workers who barely knew how to type and were badly tortured.</p>
<p class="para">The fact that personal relations play a fundamental role in the recruitment patterns of the online scam industry, at least when it comes to ethnic Chinese victims, is borne out by the previously mentioned survey we conducted in 2023 among a sample of sixty-two Chinese survivors.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn34" id="ch02_ft34">34</a></sup> Our survey revealed that as many as 79.4 per cent of our respondents had found their jobs through personal acquaintances, against only 8.8 per cent who had been recruited through social media (they specifically mentioned Douyin, Xiaohongshu, and WeChat), 8.8 per cent who had gone through employment agencies, and barely 2.9 per cent who had fallen for ads on job-advertisement platforms. Asked about their relationship with the people who introduced them to the industry, 46.9 per cent stated that they were friends, 21.9 per cent acquaintances or fellow townspeople, 9.4 per cent relatives, and 6.2 per cent business relations. Only 6.2 per cent of the respondents indicated that they were tricked by strangers, and 3.1 per cent by someone they met on the internet.</p>
<p class="para">The existence of opportunist brokers among one’s social circles can lead to a general breakdown of societal trust, especially in proximity to the scam compounds. As one of our interviewees in Sihanoukville told us: ‘The person you are eating dinner with now can be the one who sells <span id="page_91"/>you tomorrow.’ In such contexts, any basic social interaction becomes fraught with risk. During one of our visits to the city in early 2022, a Chinese food-delivery worker we had never met before had no qualms to share with us the story of how he had sold someone to a scam company:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1">
<p class="noindent1">This guy owed me money. After I urged him three times to pay me back and he refused to do so, I decided to call a manager I know from one of the compounds. I asked him to come around the restaurant I work for, and the compound car waited there and took him. He didn’t struggle when he saw the compound people, he knew it was me, and it is quite normal in Sihanoukville when you don’t have money to pay back.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="noindent1">Asked about the reasons that had prompted him to act that way, he said: ‘I had no choice but to do so. The police here are not doing anything, and I need the money for my family. I didn’t take anything more than what he owed to me from the compound. What I did was just transfer the debt to the compound, and he will work for them to pay back. It is fair.’ He was speaking in a calm tone, as if this was nothing out of the ordinary.</p>
<h2 class="h1">Social Media Influencers</h2>
<p class="noindent1">In May 2024, a social media influencer was arrested in India in a human trafficking case.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn35" id="ch02_ft35">35</a></sup> According to Indian police, he had sent thirty-three people abroad – twelve to Laos, twelve to Armenia, four to Bangkok, three to Canada, and two to Singapore – on the pretext of helping them secure jobs, but once they arrived at their destination, they were forced to commit cyberfraud. While the man was allegedly directly involved in trafficking these people, social media influencers sometimes play a more subtle role. It is not uncommon for people to end up in scam compounds after heeding the call of some influencer who extolls Southeast Asia as a place where anyone willing to work hard can fulfil their dreams of prosperity. These influencers often bring up how easy it is to find attractive local women – whom they describe as ‘beautiful, obedient, and eager to find Chinese boyfriends’.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn36" id="ch02_ft36">36</a></sup></p>
<p class="para"><span id="page_92"/>Some influencers also bring up enticing job opportunities with major local companies which, unbeknown to viewers, are directly involved in or linked to the scam industry. This approach is adopted by several Chinese-speaking Myanmar or Cambodian influencers. They introduce their audience to their hometowns by showing them luscious landscapes and discussing local politics and culture, but their videos invariably end up with investment or employment opportunities. An influencer from Kokang, Myanmar, is a good example of this approach.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn37" id="ch02_ft37">37</a></sup> In her videos, she frequently named three companies as pillars of the local economy, claiming that they work in real estate and tourism and create many employment opportunities for Chinese youths willing to travel there. Although it is unclear whether the woman was aware, all the companies are known to be also involved in scam-related activities.</p>
<p class="para">In some cases, links between the influencers and the scam companies have been proven beyond any reasonable doubt. We found at least two such cases, both of which involved Myanmar nationals who claimed to be descendants of the Chinese Expeditionary Force, a military unit dispatched to Burma and India by Chiang Kai-shek to aid Allied efforts against the Imperial Japanese Army during the Second World War.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn38" id="ch02_ft38">38</a></sup> The two men posted patriotic content to advertise their affection for China and the Chinese people. One of them, a young man named Li Saigao, shared several videos of himself wearing a military uniform and singing red songs. His handsome looks and patriotic speeches received widespread engagement from his audience in China, with his Douyin account quickly skyrocketing in 2021 to nearly 2 million followers. In February 2022, however, local police in Shijiazhuang, in China’s Hebei province, posted an announcement accusing him of involvement in the online scam industry.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn39" id="ch02_ft39">39</a></sup> Concurrently, police in Zhangjiajie, Hunan province, accused <span id="page_93"/>him of working for Henry Group, a company notorious for engaging in human trafficking, online scamming, and money laundering in North Myanmar; they issued a warning against accepting any job offers in the country.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn40" id="ch02_ft40">40</a></sup> Around the same time, some of his followers pointed out that in the background of one of his videos they heard the sound of people getting beaten up, and a female voice shouting: ‘I am sorry, I don’t dare to do it anymore.’<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn41" id="ch02_ft41">41</a></sup> Although he denied any wrongdoing, as more evidence of Li Saigao’s involvement in the online scam industry was shared on the internet, his accounts were blocked by Douyin and other platforms.</p>
<h2 class="h1">Organised Crime Syndicates</h2>
<p class="noindent1">As we have already discussed, the online scam industry is dominated by non-traditional ethnic Chinese criminal groups endowed with a strong entrepreneurial spirit. Yet traditional organised crime groups, including triad or triad-linked groups from Hong Kong and Taiwan, are also known to play a role. Former 14K triad leader Wan Kuok-koi (also known as Broken Tooth) is known to associate with several key industry actors, and he is also one of the investors behind the Dongmei Park scam site in Myanmar, which has been linked to human trafficking and forced criminality.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn42" id="ch02_ft42">42</a></sup> There are no doubt instances where traditional organised crime actors are linked directly to the compounds, but evidence suggests one area they are heavily involved in is recruitment and trafficking. In Taiwan, local media have extensively reported on cases of individuals kidnapped or tricked by local mafia groups such as the United Bamboo Gang (<span class="font1">竹</span><span class="font1">聯</span><span class="font1">幫</span> <i>zhulianbang</i>), the Thento Union (<span class="font1">天</span><span class="font1">道</span><span class="font1">盟</span> <i>tiandaomeng</i>), the Four Seas Gang (<span class="font1">四</span><span class="font1">海</span><span class="font1">幫</span> <i>sihaibang</i>), the San Guang Gang (<span class="font1">三</span><span class="font1">光</span><span class="font1">幫</span> <i>sanguangbang</i>), and the Feng Fei Sha Gang (<span class="font1">風</span><span class="font1">飛</span><span class="font1">沙</span><span class="font1">幫</span> <i>fengfeishabang</i>).<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn43" id="ch02_ft43">43</a></sup></p>
<p class="para"><span id="page_94"/>Over the years, these Taiwanese groups have formalised much of their activity by registering companies, with representatives assuming company titles and handing out business cards.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn44" id="ch02_ft44">44</a></sup> According to one report from TVBS News, some have registered new companies and then used these start-ups to place job advertisements on legitimate websites in order to lure recruits.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn45" id="ch02_ft45">45</a></sup> These shell companies present themselves as operations where much of the work can be done online, such as studios producing games or music. Initially, they onboard the new staff and operate normally so as not to arouse suspicion among their recruits. Then, once trust is established, the managers arrange a ‘team-bonding trip’ to Southeast Asia for the staff. It is often only when they get off the plane and are met by vans that bring them to the scam compounds that they realise something is off.</p>
<p class="para">Traditional organised crime groups have the advantage that they can count on their own protective umbrellas in the locations where they are based. In May 2023, a Taiwanese police chief was dismissed and detained for allegedly colluding with criminals engaged in human trafficking to Cambodia.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn46" id="ch02_ft46">46</a></sup> He faced corruption charges for allegedly receiving money in Tether cryptocurrency tokens worth NT$1 million (US$32,609), as well as charges of forgery, illegal access to and use of personal information, and leaking confidential files. Investigators said he accessed restricted police files to obtain personal information of kidnapped people, which he then passed to Tu Cheng-che, an alleged gang leader, who used it to apply for passports and access bank accounts. Tu reportedly engaged in extortion, <span id="page_95"/>online scams, and human trafficking. His associates posted job ads on social media, then seized and tied up the people who came for interview, forcing them to give their bank details for use in money laundering. Some were forced to work for online scammers in Cambodia. Tu and his associates went into hiding in 2022 following police raids, but were tracked down and arrested in March and April 2023.</p>
<p class="para">Traditional organised crime groups also supply scam operations with associates who already have experience in money laundering, phone scamming, lottery fraud, and other grey industries (<span class="font1">灰</span><span class="font1">产</span> <i>huichan</i>). Not only are these skilled professionals, but they also willingly engage in criminal activity, which makes them highly sought after. Given the huge profits involved, some syndicates not directly involved in online scams have attempted to capitalise on the industry by dispatching their members to more specialised gangs, and organised crime groups from different countries frequently cooperate transnationally to share their workforce.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn47" id="ch02_ft47">47</a></sup> Gang leadership send junior members (<span class="font1">小</span><span class="font1">弟</span> <i>xiaodi</i>, or little brothers) to support allied gangs in their online scam work abroad; in return the recipient gang sends back a share of the profits, usually in the form of cryptocurrency.</p>
<p class="para">Yet not all of those dispatched by these syndicates go voluntarily. Further confirming the moral ambiguity of the industry, many follow the same trajectory as civilians, getting tricked and being sold from one compound to the next. One of our interviewees, a former member of a Hong Kong triad, was originally dispatched to Sihanoukville by his boss with the stated aim of laundering money. Once there, however, he was asked to do online fraud instead. Being inexperienced in this line of work, he was slow on the uptake. Facing exhausting work hours, endless criticism, and physical beatings from the managers, at the first opportunity he contacted his boss to request a transfer. He ended up at another scam operator in Myawaddy in Myanmar, where he says he was treated much better.</p>
<p class="para"><span id="page_96"/>In the summer of 2022, as mainstream coverage of scams in Cambodia and Myanmar increased in the Hong Kong media, some operators in Myawaddy decided to offload their Hong Kong staff. With his parents’ help, the young man got his ransom paid and was one of the first to leave his company. During our interview with him, he revealed to us how triad members are tricked by their bosses into joining scam companies:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1">
<p class="noindent1">To be honest, a lot of triads in Hong Kong would sell their members for online scam work. Sometimes they would make up some excuse, pretending to send members for training programmes abroad; other times, they would just openly tell their members that they are sending them to Cambodia for online scamming. But usually, if triad leaders know that the working environment they are going to send people to is very bad, like in those compounds where people are not allowed to sleep at all, then they just make up these nice excuses.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="noindent1">He also mentioned two other people whom he had met when he was in Sihanoukville: ‘They are from a gang in Taiwan, and they were tricked by their leader to come to Cambodia. They knew they were going to do something bad, but they just did not expect the conditions under which they were going to work could be so terrible.’</p>
<p class="para">Aside from the internal dissatisfaction from disgruntled members as news of these betrayals spread, gangs also often face each other in conflicts for power, money, and staff – a dynamic that is referred to as ‘black eat black’ (<span class="font1">黑</span><span class="font1">吃</span><span class="font1">黑</span> <i>hei chi hei</i>) in Chinese-language media.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn48" id="ch02_ft48">48</a></sup> In one particularly gruesome case, a Taiwanese gang that directly managed a scam company in Cambodia sent one of its workers, a man who himself had previously been tricked into the industry, to pick up five new Taiwanese recruits, handle their passports and visas upon arrival, and bring them to the compound.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn49" id="ch02_ft49">49</a></sup> Instead of following the instructions, however, the <span id="page_97"/>man called a van and sent the freshly arrived staff to a rival compound before vanishing into thin air. It was soon discovered that the rival gang had bought the people at a rate of US$23,000–25,000 per person. The first gang put a huge bounty on the traitor. Eventually, they caught him: first, they filmed as they tortured him to death in front of other gang members; then they dumped his body.</p>
<p class="para">Further complicating this issue, some triad-linked actors have also been involved in rescuing people from the industry. Relatives of trafficked individuals are often unable to secure their release by simply engaging with law enforcement or government officials. This is especially the case for people from Taiwan, which does not have formal diplomatic or law enforcement relationships with the countries where the scam compounds are located. In several reported cases, these family members have sought help from people with triad connections.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn50" id="ch02_ft50">50</a></sup></p>
<p class="para">Zhang Anle, also known as White Wolf (<span class="font1">白</span><span class="font1">狼</span> <i>bailang</i>), a former leader of the United Bamboo Gang, has been one of the best known and most controversial characters in this regard. Now head of the Chinese Unification Promotion Party (<span class="font1">中</span><span class="font1">華</span><span class="font1">統</span><span class="font1">一</span><span class="font1">促</span><span class="font1">進</span><span class="font1">黨</span> <i>zhonghua tongyi cujin dang</i>), which he established in 2005, he claims to have retired from the underworld. Stories describing how he used his connections to secure the release of people in scam compounds abound in Chinese-language media. Taiwan’s <i>Mirror Media</i>, for instance, reported that in one case he used alleged connections with the Cambodian military to assist the rescue of five people.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn51" id="ch02_ft51">51</a></sup> Voice of Democracy reported how Zhang helped to secure the release of another Taiwanese man, who had been trafficked to Cambodia and then to northern Laos.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn52" id="ch02_ft52">52</a></sup> While this has earned him some praise from the public, it has also attracted the attention of Taiwanese law enforcement, <span id="page_98"/>which accused him of ‘playing both angel and demon’: according to them, while the United Bamboo Gang has played a role in rescuing some people, it is simultaneously one of the main groups allegedly selling Taiwanese citizens into the scam industry in Southeast Asia.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn53" id="ch02_ft53">53</a></sup></p>
<h2 class="h1">Kidnappings</h2>
<p class="noindent1">Another route into the scam compounds is kidnapping. This became more common during the COVID-19 pandemic, when travel was restricted, making recruitment increasingly difficult. This was particularly the case in Cambodia.</p>
<p class="para">As the country’s casino industry expanded rapidly in the late 2010s, areas in which casinos were concentrated soon became associated with high incidences of violence and other crimes. Many casino operators utilised security teams led by gang-affiliated individuals, who dealt with unruly patrons but also enforced debt collection, among other tasks. However, after the ban on online gambling in August 2019 and the obliteration of tourism caused by the pandemic, a wave of casino closures occurred, leaving many of these debt collectors unemployed and seeking new ways to make a living. As one of our informants who worked in a scam compound told us: ‘Debt collectors are used to fancy lives, and the only skill they have is violence. So, when they found themselves out of the casinos, they resorted to kidnapping people for the scam companies.’</p>
<p class="para">Through the COVID-19 pandemic, some of these gangsters resorted to kidnapping Chinese residents and selling them to scam compounds to make a living. They generally operated independently, building connections with multiple companies and selling their services to the highest bidder. One interviewee told us a story about his former supervisor in a scam company who had taken seven workers out for dinner, planning to sell them to another company. He contacted a group of gangsters in advance and arranged a hijacking. However, when the gangsters appeared, they seized the supervisor along with the men he was planning to sell, and sold them all to yet another company that had made a better offer. Information gathered from informants indicates these kinds of incidents <span id="page_99"/>remain relatively frequent in Cambodia, even though the targets of kidnappings these days seem to be mostly people who owe debts, for instance due to gambling losses, or those who are already involved with the scam industry.</p>
<h2 class="h1">Transfers between Compounds</h2>
<p class="noindent1">No matter how they enter the compounds, once inside, scam workers can always potentially be sold between different operators. A Vietnamese recruiter active in Bavet, Cambodia, described this process as ‘redeeming’ workers, with a company taking less skilled or efficient staff off the hands of another one for a lower price.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn54" id="ch02_ft54">54</a></sup> According to this recruiter, the price for a Vietnamese worker in Bavet in 2022 was around US$1,000, compared to US$3,000 in more established hubs such as Sihanoukville. This is a developed market, with rates dependent on several factors, including a worker’s current location, nationality, linguistic skills, and ability. According to our interviewees, skilled Chinese workers in Sihanoukville in 2022 sold for as much as US$10,000–15,000, while others who could not speak Chinese cost around US$3,000–5,000; in some parts of Myanmar the price for Chinese speakers could be double this amount, presumably due to the challenges and expense of getting them there.</p>
<p class="para">Either because they cannot afford it or because they want to keep their hands relatively clean, some scam compounds try not to get directly involved in human trafficking and kidnappings, preferring instead to take in workers who have joined voluntarily or are sold by other compounds. In these cases, they usually offer appealing commissions, called tea fees (<span class="font1">茶</span><span class="font1">水</span><span class="font1">费</span> <i>chashuifei</i>), to brokers from other compounds who claim to offer people who have joined their workforce voluntarily. Before moving forward with the hire, they conduct interviews with both the compounds selling the workers and the workers themselves. According to some of our interviewees who went through this process, the interviews usually focus on whether the worker joined the industry willingly and if abuse was involved at any point. But according to the testimonies we collected, those who were forced to take part in these interviews were intimidated into pretending willingness to work in the scam industry.</p>
<h2 class="h1"><span id="page_100"/>Routes</h2>
<p class="noindent1">So far, we have covered the main channels through which people end up in the scam compounds but not the physical routes they take in their journey. Once recruited, workers need to be transported to the location where they will be working. Depending on their circumstances and where they are travelling from, they may travel by themselves or in a group with fellow recruits via regular channels. In some cases, they may be smuggled or trafficked across (sometimes multiple) international borders.</p>
<p class="para">In many reported cases, those who have been tricked into the work realise that something is amiss only when they are already well on their way to the scam compounds. As Alice recounted to us:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1">
<p class="noindent1">I arrived in Phnom Penh by plane in late June. A person picked me up from the airport and brought me to a hotel. After a few hours, someone else came up saying that he would drive me to the company. I got in the car. After one or two hours, I asked why we hadn’t arrived yet. He said that the company was in Sihanoukville and there were still two hours to go. I looked it up on the map and realised the place was very far, a coastal city. They drove for a long time, and I felt it was a bit strange, because I texted the person who introduced me to this work, but he had blocked me. The entire four-hour drive was through some rural and less developed places. I felt like I was being kidnapped and started panicking.</p>
<p class="para">Once I arrived in Sihanoukville, I found it full of casinos, online gambling venues, hotels, and KTVs [karaoke parlours], so it felt weirder and weirder. Then I arrived at a compound called Huangsha Casino. There was a large fence at the gate to prevent people from entering, with many security guards around. After entering, I still did not see the boss I was supposed to meet, so I panicked. They put me into a small room. Inside the room were bunk beds, and some people were sleeping in them. Then they broke the news to me that I was not there to be a secretary, that I had been trafficked to do online gambling. The person who had picked me up at the airport had just sold me for US$25,000.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="para">These days, many of those who travel through legal channels first fly to Thailand and then are brought to neighbouring countries by land. As news of the industry has spread far and wide, this is one way for recruiters <span id="page_101"/>to avoid arousing the suspicions of their targets. But not all those who have been recruited into compounds in Southeast Asia are able to travel through legal channels. As awareness of the problems associated with online gambling and scam operations in Southeast Asia spread in 2020, the Chinese government stepped up border controls for citizens travelling to countries known to host these operations and, although the document was never published, China’s Ministry of Culture and Tourism reportedly circulated a blacklist of destinations for which travellers were subject to additional scrutiny before being permitted to depart.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn55" id="ch02_ft55">55</a></sup> To make things more complicated for prospective migrants, starting in May 2022, to enforce their zero-COVID policy, the Chinese authorities began to ‘strictly limit’ unnecessary outbound travel.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn56" id="ch02_ft56">56</a></sup></p>
<p class="para">Many of those recruited into the industry had never left China before, and with Chinese citizens applying for a new passport now needing to declare which countries they planned to travel to and provide documents proving why the trip was necessary, obtaining a passport for destinations such as Cambodia, Myanmar, Laos, or the Philippines became increasingly difficult, if not impossible. Even those Chinese citizens who already possessed travel documents faced hurdles. After purchasing flights to these countries, some received calls from the local police enquiring about the purpose of their trips. Once they arrived at the departure airport, border guards stopped them to ask questions about their planned activities in the destination country, asked to see return tickets, and, if they were travelling for work, demanded that they produce documents proving the work was legitimate. If the officers found the situation suspicious, they refused permission to leave the country.</p>
<p class="para">These travel controls were integrated into the Law against Telecom and Online Fraud, passed in September 2022, which formalised Chinese immigration authorities’ powers to impose exit bans on those travelling to overseas hotspots if suspected of being likely to engage in telecom or online fraud once abroad.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn57" id="ch02_ft57">57</a></sup> Since then – and even after the Chinese government lifted its zero-COVID policy in December 2022 – there have been <span id="page_102"/>further reports of Chinese nationals attempting to travel to Southeast Asia being blocked by immigration at airports in China. This has also impacted people who argue vigorously that they are involved in legitimate business in the country they are travelling to.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn58" id="ch02_ft58">58</a></sup> Local authorities in some areas have required that travellers produce documents such as evidence of property ownership in their country of destination, work permits and contracts, and company business licences, in order to prove that the purpose of their travel is legitimate. If travel is deemed suspicious, people may be blacklisted; they must then request for restrictions to be lifted and apply for a new passport. Some people report waiting weeks for clearance.</p>
<p class="para">Other governments throughout the region have also been implementing measures to prevent their citizens from travelling to areas now perceived as dangerous. For instance, in the summer of 2022, Taiwan’s Aviation Police Bureau started putting up warning posters and dispatching officers to its international airports to question individuals flying to Southeast Asia about their travel plans in an attempt to raise awareness about the scam compounds and prevent travellers from falling prey to traffickers.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn59" id="ch02_ft59">59</a></sup> Several embassies in Southeast Asia have also prominently featured travel advice on their websites, warning citizens to beware of job ads promising high salaries for vaguely described online work in the region.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn60" id="ch02_ft60">60</a></sup></p>
<p class="para">Unfortunately, these restrictions have not been enough; often they just make the trips more difficult and more dangerous. In the Chinese case, the country’s zero-COVID policy of compulsory testing, stringent lockdowns, and travel restrictions contributed to mass unemployment.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn61" id="ch02_ft61">61</a></sup> <span id="page_103"/>The resulting economic hardship pushed some to run unthinkable risks to find ways to cross borders and go to countries where they had never previously considered seeking employment. For instance, a Chinese restaurant owner who lost his business in 2021 told us:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1">
<p class="noindent1">I didn’t care if it was Cambodia or Colombia: I really needed a job because the whole family relies on my salary. The day after I accepted their offer, the company moved very quickly and bought me a ticket to Phnom Penh. This made me believe they were a legitimate entity with strong financial capability. However, when I got to the airport in Xiamen, I got stopped by the border police, and they kept telling me the job was fake. Of course, I had a moment of doubt, so I returned home and stayed for another two months.</p>
<p class="para">At that point, my children were starving. I knew the person who offered me the job for more than ten years, and I really could not afford to be unemployed anymore. So, when he asked me to go to a border city with transportation that he had arranged, I just went. To be honest, I cannot speak any language other than Chinese and have no idea of the geography; I thought where I went was Cambodia. It was when they forced me with a knife to take the small path and told me that I was in Vietnam that I realised I was being trafficked.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="para">Large numbers of people have travelled to scam compounds in Myanmar and Laos across the long land border dividing the countries, escorted by professional smugglers, or snakeheads (<span class="font1">蛇</span><span class="font1">头</span> <i>shetou</i>). Although it is heavily policed, the sheer length of the border and its often rugged terrain make it impossible to stop determined traffickers moving people across. The main land routes from China to Cambodia travel through Vietnam and Laos, and chains of actors in each country shepherd recruits across borders, then transport them via a network of safe houses to their destination. Some travelling from Taiwan and China have travelled by sea, setting out in speedboats before being transferred to larger boats for the days-long journey, then handed off to smaller boats again closer to the Cambodian coast.</p>
<p class="para"><span id="page_104"/>These sea routes are well known to the Chinese authorities. While the country’s extensive coastline is challenging to monitor, the Chinese police have executed a number of major trafficking busts in the past few years. For instance, in November 2021 the Entry-Exit Frontier Inspection Bureau of Guangxi Province smashed a large cross-border smuggling gang suspected of organising Chinese citizens’ illegal departure by sea in order to engage in criminal activities abroad.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn62" id="ch02_ft62">62</a></sup> Investigators found a speedboat picking people up in batches and taking them to a cargo ship: seventy-nine people were found below deck, originating from fifteen provinces around China. Over the following year, 108 connected suspects were arrested. Investigations found the gang behind the smuggling operation was not only working with overseas snakeheads, but also performed recruitment, disseminating ads over social media for well-paid overseas jobs. Investigators tracked financial flows linked to the group and during 2022 seized computers and mobile phones, leading to the arrest of gang leaders and recruiters. Sixty-nine people were eventually fined and sentenced to jail terms from nine months to eight years.</p>
<p class="para">Two of our interviewees, a young couple, told us the story of how they were trafficked to Sihanoukville by sea:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1">
<p class="noindent1">That day, two of our friends asked us to go out at sea to fish. We had already done that before, so we trusted them even though we realised that there were people we didn’t know on the boat. They told us they were friends. However, after they sailed for a long time and showed no intention of stopping, we started to panic and asked them where we were going. They refused to answer until we reached a bigger boat. Those friends then pushed us onto the new boat, and people with guns immediately surrounded us. They forced us to stay below deck for seven or eight days until we reached Sihanoukville. We were so scared that they would throw us into the sea that we were completely obedient. We know they have been using the same port for parking the smuggling boat for months because later we met another couple, and they were smuggled the same way and arrived in exactly the same location.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="para">This dangerous route made international headlines in September 2022, when a boat smuggling forty-one Chinese nationals sank off the coast of <span id="page_105"/>Sihanoukville, causing the death of at least eleven people.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn63" id="ch02_ft63">63</a></sup> According to survivor testimonies, the group had left Guangzhou, in China’s Guangdong province, by speedboat on 11 September; six days later, on 17 September, they had boarded a second boat, accompanied by two Cambodian guides.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn64" id="ch02_ft64">64</a></sup> Conditions on the trip had been harrowing. On 22 September, as they encountered heavy seas and the boat started to flounder, another boat came to pick up the Cambodian guides but left the others to their fate. The stories collected by journalists in the wake of the tragedy repeated the usual refrain: the survivors had been left unemployed by the pandemic and were desperate, then someone had come along promising them employment.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn65" id="ch02_ft65">65</a></sup></p>
<h2 class="h1">An Increasingly Diverse Workforce</h2>
<p class="noindent1">As we put the final touches to this book in late 2024, we are witnessing some concerning developments in the recruitment strategies of scam operations. First, as the crackdown on online scams and related activities has intensified in mainland China, scam businesses are increasingly reluctant to let their hard-acquired workforce go. According to a police officer involved in investigating online scam cases in Gansu province who has been quoted by Chinese media, the crackdown means that the cost of recruiting personnel has increased from tens of thousands of yuan to hundreds of thousands: ‘Once they fall into the hands of a fraud gang, they will not let these people go home easily unless they earn their money back with interest.’<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn66" id="ch02_ft66">66</a></sup></p>
<p class="para">Second, as the industry has grown it has diversified its targets, which in turn has increased the need to find workers from a range of countries. As we mentioned earlier in the book, international organisations have recorded people of over forty nationalities trapped in Southeast Asia’s scam compounds.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn67" id="ch02_ft67">67</a></sup> We ourselves have witnessed how the industry today <span id="page_106"/>is less reliant on Chinese workers and has become more diverse, with more survivors hailing from farther away. Thousands of Indonesian and Vietnamese workers are present in scam operations across the region, targeting their compatriots back home with online gambling promotion and scams. Individuals from Malaysia, the Philippines, Laos, and Myanmar are also present, as well as people from South Asia and Africa. While some countries have been proactive and determined in trying to assist citizens trapped in the compounds, others have shown a disappointing lack of concern. As the workforce further diversifies, people from further afield may not even have an embassy in the country where they end up, making assistance all the harder to find.</p>
<p class="para">Third, as the adult population in China and other Southeast Asian countries becomes more aware of the existence of the scam compounds and the ways people get tricked into them, younger people are increasingly likely to fall victim to the industry. Cases of minors from the region tricked into scam operations are on the increase. The 2023 report on efforts to tackle the industry published by China’s Supreme People’s Procuratorate, referred to earlier in the book, noted that the number of minors prosecuted in connection to online fraud was just 1 per cent of the total.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn68" id="ch02_ft68">68</a></sup> This represented a 68 per cent increase on the previous year, however, and examples of minors being lured or trafficked abound in the Chinese press. In March 2023, a Shanghai media outlet covered the case of a fifteen-year-old boy from Sichuan province who had been missing for a month after crossing into Myanmar for a promised ‘high-paying job’.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn69" id="ch02_ft69">69</a></sup> In the same month, Chinese media also widely reported the story of four students from a vocational school in Hefei, Anhui province.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn70" id="ch02_ft70">70</a></sup> In May, Along, an anonymous Chinese blogger who has made a name for himself in covering these issues, reported that he had received a request from a <span id="page_107"/>Chinese family to help find their sixteen-year-old son who was missing in northern Myanmar.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#ch02_fn71" id="ch02_ft71">71</a></sup></p>
<p class="para">In 2024, we ourselves came across several disturbing cases involving minors trafficked to Southeast Asia. One of them, a fifteen-girl from Yunnan province, was introduced to a man through a childhood friend. Even though he was fully aware of her youth, the man pursued a romantic relationship with the girl and eventually convinced her to travel to his workplace, in Laos’s Golden Triangle. Blindly in love, she agreed to go to a city near the border with Vietnam, where someone picked her up. Having never been outside China, the girl believed she was heading to Laos; only after days of travel did she realise that she had been brought to Cambodia. Once in Sihanoukville, she received help from an unexpected quarter: her snakehead. Upon hearing that the plan was to bring her to a notorious compound further down the Cambodian coast and having realised her young age, the man contacted the bosses at another compound in the vicinity, who agreed to pay US$7,000 to redeem the girl from the scammers who claimed to have bought her. Such help was not selfless, as the girl would soon learn when one of the men attempted to take advantage of her. Only the intervention of a Chinese businessman in Cambodia, who was known for helping people escape from the compounds, got her out of this ordeal.</p>
<p class="para">All we have discussed so far allows us to draw a couple of important conclusions. One is that the variety of channels into the online scam industry reflects the diversity of the people who end up ensnared by it. While once dominated by ethnic Chinese people, the workforce of the online scam compounds is now becoming increasingly diverse in terms of country of provenance, skills, age, and gender. This means that any attempt to sketch a profile of the typical victim of forced criminality in the industry is likely to be an oversimplification. As we have seen in the Introduction, many observers have adopted a narrative that ‘cyber slaves’ are generally better educated and more skilled than traditional victims of modern slavery. But official data and our own surveys show that many survivors from mainland China – the backbone of the industry for many years – are young, with a relatively low level of education, and most often from disadvantaged <span id="page_108"/>backgrounds. The truth is that, thanks to advancements in the technology available to scam operators, the industry attracts and relies on all sorts of people, and there is no such thing as a typical victim.</p>
<p class="para">This brings us to another uncomfortable conclusion about current prevention strategies, which are largely based on raising public awareness about the industry. It is true that, as knowledge of the scam compounds spreads due to increasing media coverage and government-led awareness-raising efforts, recruitment is becoming harder than it was for scam operators. On the other hand, as the lingering economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic – which, in many cases, have occurred on top of decades of neoliberal and predatory economic policies – have left behind a legacy of widespread immiseration, many, especially those from younger generations, are likely to continue experiencing limited employment prospects and to remain prime targets. Recruitment dynamics might shift over time, with operators adjusting the balance of coercion versus rewards in order to attract their staff, but as long as viable alternatives remain scarce, people will remain vulnerable to the lure of the industry.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>