<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Scam: Inside Southeast Asia’s Cybercrime Compounds</title>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
<link href="stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:bbb0d83e-b2b6-4881-9f3b-4f673f963ae3" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div id="Conclusion">
<h1 class="fm-title"><span id="page_197"/><span class="bd">Conclusion</span></h1>
<p class="noindent1">To face a crisis that transcends national borders, transnational responses are required. Over the past few years, there have been several joint law enforcement actions made possible by bilateral or multilateral agreements and partnerships. For instance, when reports of violent crime in Sihanoukville were becoming widespread in 2018, Cambodia and China reached a formal agreement to establish a law enforcement partnership, which resulted in the opening of the China–Cambodia Law Enforcement Cooperation Office in Phnom Penh in September 2019.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn1" id="chcon_ft1">1</a></sup> This was the first such bilateral office set up by China in the world. The Chinese government also became proactive with Myanmar, pushing the national authorities to crack down on the online scam industry and launching several joint operations with local police in 2023, before ramping up this cooperation in the north of the country in September that year.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn2" id="chcon_ft2">2</a></sup> In the past couple of years, there have additionally been numerous bilateral commitments between regional police forces to increase coordination on the issue, and at the May 2023 ASEAN Summit, the leaders of the ten countries adopted a specific declaration on combating trafficking in persons ‘caused by the abuse of technology’.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn3" id="chcon_ft3">3</a></sup></p>
<p class="para"><span id="page_198"/>In the absence of any detailed and consistent disclosure on the outcomes of these various commitments, however, it is challenging to assess how effective they have truly been, especially as it is clear that the industry continues to thrive, despite various setbacks. China’s law enforcement cooperation with Cambodia has been heavily publicised, yet information that can be gleaned from media reports and official Chinese documents indicates China has had far more success in cracking down on the parts of the criminal networks active within its own borders, as well as apprehending citizens when they return there. In Myanmar, despite numerous high-level engagements with the junta leadership, China’s influence failed to prevent the expansion of a massive scam empire stretching from the border with Thailand to China’s doorstep. The Kokang region’s online scam industry was brought down, but this may not have been the case were it not for the ethnic armed organisations of the Brotherhood Alliance launching their military operation targeting the region in October 2023. The month prior, cooperation between China and Wa State authorities set in chain a series of raids which resulted in what has likely been the most successful cross-border crackdown. Thousands of Chinese nationals were handed over to China and hundreds of people from other countries were evacuated and repatriated, despite details of the operation having been leaked prior to a wave of raids, including the names of the target compounds and the times when they would be hit.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn4" id="chcon_ft4">4</a></sup> One of the authors even managed to obtain a copy of the schedule. Consequently, many scam operations pre-emptively moved their staff to mountainous areas, avoiding police intervention. Many others transferred to other parts of the country or hopped the border to neighbouring countries.</p>
<p class="para">Under these circumstances, foreign law enforcement has focused significant effort on prevention. This is unsurprising given the enormous logistical and financial challenges involved in cross-border actions, as well as the complexity of coordinating across multiple jurisdictions and with bilateral partners that often lack the willingness or ability to crack down on activities within their own countries. During our discussions with civil society practitioners and law enforcement officials, the problem of insufficient cooperation and lack of coordination was a recurring grievance. As <span id="page_199"/>a legal-support team member from one nongovernmental organisation told us: ‘Addressing such crimes typically necessitates collaboration among law enforcement agencies spanning at least three to four countries. I have been trying to help scam victims to sue their perpetrators, but I found a common scenario in which a Chinese perpetrator residing in Cambodia trafficked a Filipino individual to deceive a US citizen, using credit cards from Dubai for money laundering.’</p>
<p class="para">As we have seen, in some cases, such as Taiwan, police have attempted to stop people from travelling to high-risk areas by dispatching personnel to the airports to warn people about to embark on flights to Southeast Asia for dubious work placements. The Philippines Bureau of Immigration has released a steady stream of warnings to citizens planning to travel to Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, and Myanmar for jobs in customer service and other remote online work. In other cases, such as in mainland China, the authorities made it difficult for citizens to cross customs controls to board for a suspicious destination without a credible travel reason, with police even calling people who booked flights to travel to Southeast Asian countries to ask for details about the purpose of their trip.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn5" id="chcon_ft5">5</a></sup> Much effort also went into arresting recruiters and trafficking gangs, and dismantling money-laundering networks.</p>
<p class="para">The Chinese government has been particularly active in seeking ways to disrupt the flow of labour and hit the sections of the scam economy that lie within its territory. Besides launching anti-scam campaigns aimed at raising public awareness of the industry, the Chinese authorities have adopted increasingly harsh measures. To list just some of the most consequential policies, in February 2021, China’s Supreme Court, Supreme Procuratorate, and Ministry of Public Security jointly released a ‘Notice on Urging Criminal Suspects Related to Cross-Border Gambling to Surrender’, which attempted to persuade Chinese citizens involved in gambling, opening casinos, and other related crimes overseas to return to China by promising more lenient treatment if they voluntarily surrendered to law enforcement organs.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn6" id="chcon_ft6">6</a></sup> In December 2022, China’s first Anti-Telecom and <span id="page_200"/>Online Fraud Law came into effect, requiring telecom operators, financial institutions, and internet service providers to set up internal systems for controlling fraud risks and setting out penalties, including imprisonment and fines for individuals involved in fraudulent activities.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn7" id="chcon_ft7">7</a></sup> In December 2024, to support the implementation of this new law, the Ministry of Public Security enforced more severe punishment measures for telecom fraudsters and those who assist them, such as people who illegally buy, sell, rent, or lend SIM cards, bank or payment accounts, digital wallets, internet accounts, and domain names.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn8" id="chcon_ft8">8</a></sup></p>
<p class="para">While these measures have filled legislative gaps that have been exposed by the rise of the scam industry, at the subnational level some extreme and sometimes unsanctioned methods were used to pursue people allegedly involved in illegal gambling or fraud overseas. Over the past few years Chinese police started to call the relatives of people suspected of involvement in illegal activities in Southeast Asia, and issued public announcements in their home communities threatening punishment if they refused to return within a given time.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn9" id="chcon_ft9">9</a></sup> These punishments included being added to a ‘List of Dishonest People’ (<span class="font1">失</span><span class="font1">信</span><span class="font1">人</span><span class="font1">员</span><span class="font1">名</span><span class="font1">单</span> <i>shixin renyuan mingdan</i>). Anyone appearing on these lists was prevented from purchasing property, using online payment platforms such as Alipay or WeChat for money transfers, and buying train and flight tickets, among many other inconveniences; as well, alleged scammers’ immediate family members were forbidden from taking jobs in the public sector or joining the army, their financial credit downgraded, and their children’s access to education limited. In some cases, this included cancelling their household registration (<span class="font1">户</span><span class="font1">籍</span> <i>huji</i>), which would prevent those on the list and their immediate family members from accessing public services.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn10" id="chcon_ft10">10</a></sup></p>
<p class="para"><span id="page_201"/>Measures vary across different towns and counties, and in some hotspot areas identified for their high concentration of individuals who have entered the online scam industry abroad, some went as far as public shaming of the families of alleged scammers by daubing their houses with slogans such as ‘Shame on Online Scamming’ (<span class="font1">电</span><span class="font1">诈</span><span class="font1">可</span><span class="font1">耻</span> <i>dianzha kechi</i>).<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn11" id="chcon_ft11">11</a></sup> When people do return to China, even those who are acknowledged as having been trapped in scam compounds can be subject to punishment. In December 2023, the <i>China Daily</i> reported that a man lured to northern Myanmar was sentenced to two years in prison by a court in Guizhou province after he returned and surrendered to authorities in China.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn12" id="chcon_ft12">12</a></sup> He had been trapped in Myanmar for three years, and had been sold several times. He was subject to physical abuse and his movement was restricted; he only escaped after paying a CN¥460,000 (US$64,000) ransom. The two-year jail sentence took into account his surrender, confession, and repentance.</p>
<p class="para">Despite the widespread anger in China against those involved in online scams, some of these measures evoked public concern due to their impacts on family members who are not involved in the crimes of their relatives, as well as administrative punishments being levied on people who had after all not yet been convicted of any crime.<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn13" id="chcon_ft13">13</a></sup> Furthermore, given what we know about the industry, it is likely that many people have been unable to return home and surrender, even if they want to. Eventually, these concerns found an echo even in the official realm. In December 2023, the Legislative Affairs Commission of the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress reviewed the issuance of local government circulars that included penalties for the family members of overseas fraud suspects and ruled that they were inconsistent with China’s constitution. In their statement, they commented: ‘After study, we believe that any legal responsibility <span id="page_202"/>for unlawful or criminal conduct must rest with the perpetrator him or herself and must not be extended or attributed to others; such is one of the fundamental tenets of modern rule of law.’<sup><a href="14_Notes.xhtml#chcon_fn14" id="chcon_ft14">14</a></sup></p>
<p class="para">While better rules and improved coordination between law enforcement agencies are important in fighting the online scam industry, it is not useful to focus exclusively on a legal response without understanding the root causes that allow scam operations to thrive. If the scam economy can flourish, it is because of a confluence of factors unique to this late stage of capitalism we currently find ourselves in. Our increasingly online existence and the rapid emergence of increasingly sophisticated new technologies, including artificial intelligence, that have been deployed for scamming purposes are undoubtedly an important part of the story. So is the entrenchment of corrupt elites and the globalisation of criminal groups, both perpetually on the lookout for new markets and sources of profit. But it is the predicament of those who are at the receiving end of their plunder and violence that provides us with the most significant insights into what is behind this latest humanitarian crisis.</p>
<p class="para">On one hand, there is a growing supply of individuals rendered desperate by the lack of decent jobs and facing limited life opportunities – a situation exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic – who have been lured into the industry by the mirage of high-paying positions. Some might enter the compounds in the hope of becoming wealthy and enjoying a lifestyle as luxurious as that vaunted by their recruiters, but greed is rarely the sole motivation (and even where it is, we should interrogate the reasons behind such fascination with material wealth). On the other hand, there is an expansive pool of people who are now perpetually online, many of them also facing financial difficulties and eager to improve their lot, or simply pining for the ability to afford lifestyles and products that are marketed to them every hour of every day. Many feel lonely and isolated, leaving them vulnerable to anyone who seems to offer friendship and a sympathetic ear. While we do not seek to minimise the culpability of those who voluntarily enter into and profit from this industry, it is crucial to examine <i>why</i> they make this choice, just as it is to understand how people are tricked and forced into it. In the case of both scammed and scammers, assuming that greed is the sole motivation fails to take into account the emotionally bleak <span id="page_203"/>landscape of our societies at this stage, and the atomisation and loneliness that often characterise the human experience in our epoch.</p>
<p class="para">It is exactly because of these structural conditions that, no matter how hard the authorities in some countries attempt to crack down on the industry, the scam economy has been thriving and will most likely continue to grow in the coming years. When scam operators come under pressure in some areas – as happened briefly in Cambodia in September 2022, and again in late 2023 in northern Myanmar, and in mid-2024 in the Philippines and in the Golden Triangle in Laos – they are often simply able to pack up and move to a different location. Dozens of countries can provide a suitable base for these groups, as long as they can count on adequate physical infrastructure and the protection and support of local friendly elites and complicit state actors. As we have explained, over the past couple of decades the online scam industry has leapfrogged from Taiwan to mainland China, before expanding to the Philippines, Cambodia, Laos, and Myanmar, but today fraud operations have truly gone global, with evidence of scam compounds appearing as far afield as Serbia, Turkey, Georgia, Mexico, Peru, Sri Lanka, India, and Central and West Africa. As new technologies are developed and advance, online scams are likely to become more sophisticated. In other words, the industry is here to stay.</p>
<p class="para">To mitigate the immediate impacts of this industry and eventually bring it down requires joint effort from a wide range of actors, many of whom have already shown admirable dedication to the cause, under challenging and sometimes dangerous circumstances. The last few years have been a learning experience for all, from grassroots rescue groups to global law enforcement and governments. Moving forward, given the transnational and cross-sectoral implications of online fraud, it will be necessary to develop better coordination between state actors, law enforcement, international organisations, and civil society and humanitarian groups so as to conduct effective rescue operations. It will also be important to provide survivors of the scam compounds with adequate aftercare and support, including finding ways to help them reintegrate into society, as well as working with fraud victims to recover lost assets and offering them social support, including mental health services. Tech companies are failing to ensure that their services are not used as platforms for organised criminals, and urgently need to step up and address abuse to prevent the proliferation of fake job ads and the dissemination of fraudulent links and materials, as well as block channels utilised by traffickers and money launderers. Greater <span id="page_204"/>resources also need to be dedicated to transnational law enforcement activities targeting the industry, and crucially there must be repercussions for host-country collusion and inaction, which will otherwise continue to hamper global law enforcement efforts.</p>
<p class="para">The case of Alice, the young Taiwanese woman we encountered at the very beginning of this book, reminds us of what happens if the status quo persists. Even after being rescued and temporarily accommodated in a shelter run by Chinese volunteers in the Cambodian capital, life was hard. Once she was safe, she asked local civil society organisations for legal assistance, but they declined on the grounds that they were not able to take on cases involving foreigners, which made it impossible for her to be identified as a victim of human trafficking for forced labour. Desperate, she tried to report her case to the Cambodian police but was repeatedly retraumatised by the male police officer who interviewed her, as he pushed her to provide details about the sexual violence she had been subjected to and eventually refused to open a case. On the verge of a mental breakdown, she was unable to find an organisation able to provide professional psychological support. To make things worse, due to the high number of survivors, the shelter where she was living was close to capacity and could only allocate the top floor to female victims. Alice lived locked inside her room.</p>
<p class="para">While she waited to go back to Taiwan, Alice spent most of her time online. As she had asked for help through her social media accounts, her story had become common knowledge not only among her friends but also in the Chinese-speaking community in Cambodia. Many blamed her for being greedy and naïve, which caused her severe distress:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1">
<p class="noindent1">I felt so depressed when one of my best friends called me stupid. He thought I had fallen into the trap because I wanted to be paid a lot of money without considering if I was qualified for it. I told him it was not true. During the pandemic, I had no income, and my baby’s father had left me. As a single mother, I would have just grabbed any opportunity for my kid to survive.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="noindent1">Even after she got back to Taiwan, her life was not easy. Since the scam company had taken away all her money and belongings, she spent her first night back on the island on the street:</p>
<blockquote class="blockquote1">
<p class="noindent1"><span id="page_205"/>I arrived in Taiwan at night, and I met the police. They took my testimony but did not give me any instruction on how I could get justice or on the process of being identified as a modern slavery victim. I was lucky to get help from an organisation: they generously gave me a contract for three months as a survivor consultant, which helped me find some meaning in my life. But what about those victims who do not know such organisations exist? How can they be identified as victims and recover from the situation?</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="noindent1">After that contract ended, the organisation attempted to find other work for Alice but it did not come to fruition. Eventually she dropped off their radar.</p>
<h2 class="h1">Postscript</h2>
<p class="noindent1">Writing this book was one of the most challenging tasks any of us has ever embarked upon. The conversations, testimonies, and evidence we gathered, pored over, unpacked, and sought to process in the past three years have exposed us to some of the darkest of places. Trying to make sense of it all, in a context where the industry was both expanding at a frightening pace and simultaneously evolving in real time, was to chase a constantly moving target. Even as we put the finishing touches on the book, major developments were occurring.</p>
<p class="para">In early 2025, reports emerged that a Chinese actor had been tricked into travelling to Thailand for a non-existent job only to be trafficked to Myanmar and confined in a scam compound. Although his story was not unique, and he was soon released, it captured public attention all over the world. In China, it led more than 1,880 families (as of the time of writing this postscript in late February 2025) to come together and compile an online spreadsheet listing their loved ones to petition the government to locate and free them. This mobilisation led to swift action, with the Ministry of Public Security issuing an official statement outlining efforts to address the situation of Chinese citizens who were missing or trapped abroad. The public discourse in China also shifted – from initially viewing the individuals in the scam compounds as mere perpetrators – to recognising that many of them are human-trafficking victims.</p>
<p class="para">All of this instigated a series of major developments. Chinese officials <span id="page_206"/>travelled to Thailand for high-level meetings, and soon after the Thai government announced it was cutting power to border scam areas, along with supplies of fuel and the provision of internet connectivity. Myanmar junta and militia forces scrambled to limit the fallout and quickly raided major compounds and released thousands, handing them to Thailand for repatriation to their home countries.</p>
<p class="para">While such developments give rise to cautious optimism, the work of civil society groups, international organisations, and others to support rescues and provide aftercare for survivors remains crucial. Yet, at the time of writing, many of these groups are in crisis, with the Trump administration and its advisors dismantling the aid programs central to funding this work. Many of our peers and comrades continue to work unpaid, and we are as inspired by their determination as we are repulsed by the nihilism of the ideologues whose actions will surely lead to more death and misery. If nothing else, this brings home the urgent need for the global community to channel more resources towards tackling the scourge of human trafficking, modern slavery, and forced criminality, in all their various abhorrent manifestations.</p>
<p class="right"><i>February 2025</i></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>